Rollups / L2 Comparison Page (#4747)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-comparison-rollups.md

---
id: learn-comparisons-rollups
title: Layer Two and Rollups
sidebar_label: Layer Two and Rollups
description:
  Comparisons between various rollup and layer two protocols and how they relate to Polkadot.
keywords: [rollups, polkadot, scalability, shared, security, parachain, ethereum]
slug: ../learn-comparisons-rollups
---

:::note

This comparison covers general information regarding two widely used rollup mechanisms that are used

> to scale (usually EVM-based) blockchains and compares and contrasts how Polkadot deals with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to scale (usually EVM-based) blockchains and compares and contrasts how Polkadot achieves
```

scalability.

:::

> Layer two (L2) networks are notorious as being the way forward for blockchain scalability by off-loading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Layer two (L2) networks are popular as being the way forward for blockchain scalability by off-loading
```

the majority of computation from layer one (L1) networks. L2 solutions utilize the L1 network's security and functionality to build an
additional layer that is often faster, reduces fees, and solves other platform-specific issues. In

> many cases, L2 solutions focus on capitalizing on using blockspace within a particular
> blockchain to make it less costly and more efficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
many cases, L2 solutions focus on utilizing block space on a particular blockchain efficiently and cost-effectively.
```

> **Rollups** are a L2 scaling solution. At the most basic level, a rollup L2 solution is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Rollups** are an L2 scaling solution. At the most basic level, a rollup L2 solution is
```

**Pros:**

- They are not limited by the type of state change - any state change can be included, meaning
  existing apps do not have to account for it.
- They can be parallelized for scalability.
- A substantial amount of data can fit within a single rollup
  ([in the case of Ethereum, for example](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/#scaling-ethereum-with-optimistic-rollups),
  tens of thousands of transactions in a single state transition).

**Cons:**

- Transaction censorship and centralization are of concern, where sequencers/L2 nodes can be
  compromised.
- Challenge periods could take a substantial amount of time to pass, increasing time for the rollup
  to finalize onto the L1 network.
- Due to their generalist nature of including any state change for their parent network, optimistic
  rollups can run into gas limitations or cause network congestion in the case of Ethereum.

Optimistic rollups are often used in the Ethereum ecosystem. Examples of optimistic EVM-based rollup
solutions include:

- [Optimisim](https://www.optimism.io/)
- [Arbitrum](https://bridge.arbitrum.io/)

> - [Unipig](https://unipig.exchange/welcome)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Unipig](https://unipig.exchange/welcome)

```

Each shard, or parachain, is equipped with a unique state transition function (STF). This function ensures
that communication to the relay chain remains valid. Each STF, called runtime, is written in [Wasm](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-wasm). Any state transition
function is valid if it compiles to Wasm and abides by the Parachains Protocol.

Each STF runs a validity proof. The proof ([the Approval Protocol](./learn-availability.md)) is
interactive, unlike ZK rollups, which are non-interactive. Additionally, unlike ZK
rollups, there are no difficulties in creating parachains with Turing-complete logic. Each parachain
is also a full-fledged state machine (usually in the form of a blockchain). Similarly to optimistic
rollups, the Parachain Protocol also has cases where disputes and resolutions of potentially harmful
para blocks (blocks representing the parachain) can take place, in which case validators are slashed
if a bad parablock is found.

**Pros:**

- Protocol level sharding, shared security, and interoperability.
- Each shard has a low barrier of entry in terms of development, as anything that compiles to Wasm
  is a valid target.

> - Finality is usually under a minute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fast Finality (usually under a minute on Polkadot).
```

---
id: learn-comparisons-rollups
title: Layer Two and Rollups
sidebar_label: Layer Two and Rollups
description:
  Comparisons between various rollup and layer two protocols and how they relate to Polkadot.
keywords: [rollups, polkadot, scalability, shared, security, parachain, ethereum]
slug: ../learn-comparisons-rollups
---

:::note

This comparison covers general information regarding two widely used rollup mechanisms that are used
to scale (usually EVM-based) blockchains and compares and contrasts how Polkadot deals with
scalability.

:::

> Layer two networks are notorious as being the way forward for blockchain scalability by off-loading
> the majority of computation off-chain. Often, layer two solutions are needed to scale an existing
> layer one blockchain. They utilize the layer one network's security and functionality to build an
> additional layer that is often faster, reduces fees, and solves other platform-specific issues. In
> many cases, layer two solutions focus on capitalizing the use of blockspace within a particular
> blockchain to make it less costly and more efficient.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Layer two (L2) networks are notorious as being the way forward for blockchain scalability by off-loading
the majority of computation from layer one (L1) networks. L2 solutions utilize the L1 network's security and functionality to build an
additional layer that is often faster, reduces fees, and solves other platform-specific issues. In
many cases, L2 solutions focus on capitalizing on using blockspace within a particular
blockchain to make it less costly and more efficient.
```

> **Rollups** are a layer-2 scaling solution. At the most basic level, a layer two solution is
> responsible for "rolling up" transactions by batching them before publishing them to the layer one
> chain, usually through a network of **sequencers**. This mechanism could include thousands of
> transactions in a single rollup.
> 
> Polkadot implements this functionality at the native level, allowing for shared security and
> scalability of the relay chain and respective parachains. Shared security is a concept that has
> similar goals to EVM-based optimistic and zero-knowledge rollups. Still, instead of being
> implemented as a secondary layer, Polkadot guarantees native security and scalability for each of
> its parachains through the [Parachains Protocol](./learn-parachains-protocol.md). Polkadot handles
> the coordination of data from parachains into an aggregated, representative state, somewhat similar
> to how to layer two rollups function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Rollups** are a L2 scaling solution. At the most basic level, a rollup L2 solution is
responsible for "rolling up" transactions by batching them before publishing them to the L1
chain, usually through a network of **sequencers**. This mechanism could include thousands of
transactions in a single rollup.

{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} implements this functionality at the native level (i.e. without using L2 scaling solutions), allowing for shared security and
scalability of the relay chain and respective parachains. Shared security is a concept that has
similar goals to EVM-based optimistic and zero-knowledge rollups. Still, instead of being
implemented as a secondary layer, {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} guarantees native security and scalability for each of
its parachains through the [Parachains Protocol](./learn-parachains-protocol.md). {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} handles
the coordination of data from parachains into an aggregated, representative state, somewhat similar
to L2 rollups.
```

> ## Optimistic Rollups
> 
> Optimistic rollups are an interactive scaling method for layer-one blockchains. Optimistic rollups
> assume _optimisically_ that every proposed transaction is valid by default.
> 
> In the case of mitigating potentially invalid transactions, optimistic rollups introduce a
> _challenge period_ in which participants may challenge a suspect rollup. A fraud-proving scheme is
> in place to allow for several _fraud proofs_ to be submitted, rendering the rollup valid. During the
> challenge period, a set of state changes may be disputed, come to a resolution, or merely be
> included if no challenge is presented (and the required proofs are in place).
> 
> While optimistic rollups provide scalability, they have both pros and cons to their approach:
> 
> **Pros:**
> 
> - They aren't limited by the type of state change - any state change can be included, meaning
>   existing apps do not have to account for it.
> - They can be parallelized for scalability.
> - A substantial amount of data can fit within a single rollup
>   ([in the case of Ethereum, for example](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/#scaling-ethereum-with-optimistic-rollups),
>   tens of thousands of transactions in a single state transition).
> 
> **Cons:**
> 
> - Transaction censorship and centralization are concerns - sequencers/layer two nodes can be
>   compromised in this regard.
> - Challenge periods could take a substantial amount of time to pass, increasing time for the rollup
>   to finalize onto the layer one network.
> - Due to their generalist nature of including any state change for their parent network, optimistic
>   rollups can run into gas limitations or cause network congestion in the case of Ethereum.
> 
> Optimistic rollups are often used in the Ethereum ecosystem. Examples of optimistic EVM-based rollup
> solutions include:
> 
> - [Optimisim](https://www.optimism.io/)
> - [Arbitrum](https://bridge.arbitrum.io/)
> - [Unipig](https://unipig.exchange/welcome)
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Optimistic Rollups

Optimistic rollups are an interactive scaling method for L1 blockchains. They
assume _optimisically_ that every proposed transaction is valid by default.

In the case of mitigating potentially invalid transactions, optimistic rollups introduce a
_challenge period_ during which participants may challenge a suspect rollup. A fraud-proving scheme is
in place to allow for several _fraud proofs_ to be submitted. Those proofs could make the rollup valid or invalid. During the
challenge period, state changes may be disputed, resolved, or
included if no challenge is presented (and the required proofs are in place).

While optimistic rollups provide scalability, they have both pros and cons to their approach:

**Pros:**

- They are not limited by the type of state change - any state change can be included, meaning
  existing apps do not have to account for it.
- They can be parallelized for scalability.
- A substantial amount of data can fit within a single rollup
  ([in the case of Ethereum, for example](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/optimistic-rollups/#scaling-ethereum-with-optimistic-rollups),
  tens of thousands of transactions in a single state transition).

**Cons:**

- Transaction censorship and centralization are of concern, where sequencers/L2 nodes can be
  compromised.
- Challenge periods could take a substantial amount of time to pass, increasing time for the rollup
  to finalize onto the L1 network.
- Due to their generalist nature of including any state change for their parent network, optimistic
  rollups can run into gas limitations or cause network congestion in the case of Ethereum.

Optimistic rollups are often used in the Ethereum ecosystem. Examples of optimistic EVM-based rollup
solutions include:

- [Optimisim](https://www.optimism.io/)
- [Arbitrum](https://bridge.arbitrum.io/)
- [Unipig](https://unipig.exchange/welcome)
```

## Zero-knowledge Rollups

> Zero-knowledge rollups (often called ZK rollups) are a non-interactive method that utilizes
> zero-knowledge proofs to compute the validity of a particular set of state changes. Whereas
> optimistic rollups relied on fraud proofs, ZK rollups rely on cryptographic validation in the form
> of ZK proofs.
> 
> Zero-knowledge rollups are significantly faster in finalization, as the cryptographic validity proof
> handles the nuance of ensuring a rollup is valid. However, the ZK rollups often suffer from
> performance due to their complexity and are hard to integrate into resource-constrained
> environments. Because Turing completeness is also difficult to achieve due to this computational
> overhead, their ability to be generalized (in terms of blockspace) is reduced. However, they have an
> extremely promising future in solving some of the problems of optimistic rollups and addressing
> secure scalability.
> 
> **Pros:**
> 
> - They don't require a large amount of data availability. Often, the proof is enough to ensure
>   validity.
> - Rollups able to be proven trustlessly.
> - Because the proof is immediately available, finality is also instantaneous.
> - They have a promising future overall, as they haven't reached their full potential yet.
> 
> **Cons:**
> 
> - Suffer from the same problems that other layer two solutions face regarding centralization of
>   layer two operators.
> - They are computationally expensive, and ZK circuits are difficult to implement.
> - The potential for congestion is still a factor, as the amount of data could still be problematic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Zero-knowledge rollups (often called ZK rollups) are a non-interactive method that utilizes
zero-knowledge proofs to compute the validity of a particular set of state changes. Whereas
optimistic rollups relied on fraud proofs, ZK rollups rely on cryptographic validation in the form
of ZK proofs.

Zero-knowledge rollups are significantly faster in finalization, as the cryptographic validity proof
handles the nuance of ensuring a rollup is valid. However, the ZK rollups often suffer from
performance due to their complexity and difficult implementation into resource-constrained
environments. Because Turing completeness is also challenging to achieve due to this computational
overhead, their ability to be generalized (in terms of blockspace) is reduced. However, they have a promising future in solving some of the problems of optimistic rollups and addressing
secure scalability.

**Pros:**

- They only require a small amount of data availability. Often, the proof is enough to ensure
  validity.
- They can be proven trustlessly.
- Because the proof is immediately available, finality is also instantaneous.
- They have a promising future overall, as they have not reached maturity yet.

**Cons:**

- They suffer from the same problems that other L2 solutions have regarding the centralization of
  L2 operators.
- They are computationally expensive, and ZK circuits are difficult to implement.
- The potential for congestion is still a factor, as the amount of data could still be problematic.
```

## Polkadot - Native Shared Security

> Whereas rollups are considered solutions for layer two protocols,
> {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} include this functionality natively
> through its [Parachains Protocol](./learn-parachains-protocol.md). The Parachains Protocol, which is
> how Polkadot handles the **sharding** of its network is meant to accomplish the combined goals of
> providing security, scalability, and availability.
> 
> It's what enables parachains to verify their collective state and communicate with one another.
> Parachains have similarities to aspects of optimistic and zero-knowledge rollups, which are
> reflected in how Polkadot handles the validity and availability of the parachain state.
> [Collators](./learn-collator.md), a key part of Polkadot's architecture, is in principle similar to
> a sequencer, as collators pass data with a proof-of-validity (PoV) function for liveness and
> communication with the relay chain.
> 
> Each shard, or parachain, is equipped with a unique state transition function. This function ensures
> that communication to the relay chain remains valid. Each state transition function, called a
> runtime, is written in [Wasm](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-wasm). Any state transition
> function is valid so long compiles to Wasm and abides by the Parachains Protocol.
> 
> Each STF runs a validity proof. The proof ([the Approval Protocol](./learn-availability.md)) is
> interactive, unlike zero-knowledge rollups, which are non-interactive. Additionally, unlike ZK
> rollups, there are no difficulties in creating parachains with Turing-complete logic. Each parachain
> is also a full-fledged state machine (usually in the form of a blockchain). Similarly to optimistic
> rollups, the Parachain Protocol also has cases where disputes and resolutions of potentially bad
> para blocks (blocks representing the parachain) can take place, in which case validators are slashed
> if a bad para block is found.
> 
> **Pros:**
> 
> - Protocol level sharding, shared security, and interoperability.
> - Each shard has a low barrier of entry in terms of development, as anything that compiles to Wasm
>   is a valid target.
> - Finality is usually under a minute.
> - Data availability is built-in through validators and mechanisms like
>   [erasure coding](./learn-availability#erasure-codes).
> - No layer two implies less of a risk as far as the centralization of sequencers or other layer two
>   operators.
> 
> **Cons:**
> 
> - Wasm could be a performance bottleneck, as it's slower than making native calls.
> - A considerable amount of data is required in the PoV (proof of validity) function for proving the
>   parachain state.
> - Other limitations within the Parachains Protocol to keeping parachains compatible with the entire
>   orchestration of the relay and parachains.
> 
> Despite these cons, Polkadot remains upgradable through forkless upgrades, which open the protocol
> through any improvements or changes in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whereas rollups are considered solutions for L2 protocols,
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} include this functionality natively
through its [Parachains Protocol](./learn-parachains-protocol.md). The Parachains Protocol, which is
how {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} handles network's **sharding** is meant to accomplish the combined goals of
providing security, scalability, and availability.

It enables parachains to verify their collective state and communicate with one another.
Parachains have similarities to aspects of optimistic and ZK rollups, which are
reflected in how {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} handles the validity and availability of the parachain state.
[Collators](./learn-collator.md), a key part of {{ polkadot: Polkadot's :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama's :kusama }} architecture, is in principle similar to
a sequencer, as collators pass data with a proof-of-validity (PoV) function for liveness and
communication with the relay chain.

Each shard, or parachain, is equipped with a unique state transition function (STF). This function ensures
that communication to the relay chain remains valid. Each STF, called runtime, is written in [Wasm](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-wasm). Any state transition
function is valid if it compiles to Wasm and abides by the Parachains Protocol.

Each STF runs a validity proof. The proof ([the Approval Protocol](./learn-availability.md)) is
interactive, unlike ZK rollups, which are non-interactive. Additionally, unlike ZK
rollups, there are no difficulties in creating parachains with Turing-complete logic. Each parachain
is also a full-fledged state machine (usually in the form of a blockchain). Similarly to optimistic
rollups, the Parachain Protocol also has cases where disputes and resolutions of potentially harmful
para blocks (blocks representing the parachain) can take place, in which case validators are slashed
if a bad parablock is found.

**Pros:**

- Protocol level sharding, shared security, and interoperability.
- Each shard has a low barrier of entry in terms of development, as anything that compiles to Wasm
  is a valid target.
- Finality is usually under a minute.
- Data availability is built-in through validators and mechanisms like
  [erasure coding](./learn-availability#erasure-codes).
- No L2 implies less of a risk of incurring centralization issues for sequencers or other L2
  operators.

**Cons:**

- Wasm could be a performance bottleneck, as it is slower than making native calls.
- A considerable amount of data is required in the PoV (proof of validity) function for proving the
  parachain state.
- Other limitations within the Parachains Protocol to keeping parachains compatible with the entire
  orchestration of the relay and parachains.

Despite these cons, {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} remains upgradable through forkless upgrades, which allows the protocol to be easily upgradable to stay in line with future technological advances.
```

compiles to Wasm and abides by the Parachains Protocol.

Each STF runs a validity proof. The proof ([the Approval Protocol](./learn-availability.md)) is
interactive, unlike ZK rollups, which are non-interactive. Additionally, unlike ZK rollups, there
are no difficulties in creating parachains with Turing-complete logic. Each parachain is also a
full-fledged state machine (usually in the form of a blockchain). Similarly to optimistic rollups,
the Parachain Protocol also has cases where disputes and resolutions of potentially harmful para
blocks (blocks representing the parachain) can take place, in which case validators are slashed if a
bad parablock is found.

**Benefits:**

- Protocol level sharding, shared security, and interoperability.
- Each shard has a low barrier of entry in terms of development, as anything that compiles to Wasm
  is a valid target.
- Fast Finality (usually under a minute on Polkadot).
- Data availability is built-in through validators and mechanisms like
  [erasure coding](./learn-availability#erasure-codes).
- No L2 implies less of a risk of incurring centralization issues for sequencers or other L2
  operators.

**Drawbacks:**

> - Wasm could be a performance bottleneck, as it is slower than making native calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Execution of code in Wasm could be a performance bottleneck, as it is slower than making native calls.
```

> - A considerable amount of data is required in the PoV (proof of validity) function for proving the
>   parachain state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The relay chain sets a hard limit on the size and weights of the PoV (Proof of Validity) blocks which contain the parachain state transition data.
```

Author: Thank you for this! - is there any link / source for this?

Reviewer: The Polkadot validators need to execute the transactions in PoV block within the 6 second block production time window, so for sure there is a hard limit on the weights of transactions that can be included. Else, the PoV block will get dropped. Here are a few links I could find that directly or indirectly mention this.

"The PoVs are expected to be too large to include in the blockchain directly, so we require an alternate data availability scheme which requires validators to prove that the inputs to their work will remain available, and so their work can be checked. Empirical tests tell us that many PoVs may be between 1 and 10MB during periods of heavy load." https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot/book/protocol-overview.html?highlight=10#protocol-overview

https://substrate.stackexchange.com/questions/8436/is-there-a-way-to-find-the-historic-parachain-block-pov-size
https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/758
https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/2298

Author: Thank you so much! Will include.

> - Other limitations within the Parachains Protocol to keeping parachains compatible with the entire
>   orchestration of the relay and parachains.

Reviewer: This point is too vague and can mislead the reader into assuming there are inefficiencies in the design. Unless there is a concrete drawback, avoid general statements like these.
```suggestion
```

Author: Good point, removed 👍
